Certified Coarse-to-Fine Extraction of Neural Token
            Models into Explicit Graphs
  Quotient Types, Dual Fixed Points, Information Transport, and Complete Neural
                                     Draining


                                          Formal synthesis

                                            31 July 2026


                                               Abstract

        This paper formalizes a method for converting selected neural token-processing systems into
    explicit, interpretable graph representations. The construction starts from a maximally coarse
    quotient of the reachable neural state space, treats quotient blocks as high-level behavioral
    types, and incrementally refines those types when token-conditioned counterexamples reveal
    missing distinctions. In parallel, a dual process transfers certified behavior from a shrinking
    neural residual to a growing symbolic graph. The graph sequence forms an inverse system with
    explicit forgetful maps, so each finer graph contains every distinction present at coarser levels.
    Exactness is guaranteed by simulation or bisimulation certificates, while information-theoretic
    quantities measure the transfer but are not used as substitutes for semantic proof. Under
    finite behavioral quotient, complete exploration, expressive graph rules, and a complete
    verifier, the process terminates with a graph that reproduces all observable neural behavior,
    after which the neural weights can be set to zero without changing the hybrid system. For
    continuous or nonregular systems, the same framework yields a certified approximation tower
    with decreasing error and an explicit irreducible residual.


  Central construction. Maintain a refinement tower
                                          0π    1   π
                                      Q0 ←− Q1 ←− Q2 ←
                                                     − ···

  and a dual behavior decomposition

                                          BN = BGk ⊎ BRk .

  The graph grows monotonically, the neural residual shrinks monotonically, and each transfer
  is admitted only after a proof that the hybrid model remains behaviorally equivalent to
  the original network.


Contents

1 Problem Statement and Scope                                                                            4

2 Neural Token Transducers                                                                               4

3 Behavioral Equivalence and Quotients                                                                   5
  3.1   Deterministic future equivalence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           5

                                                    1
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                             Formal Framework


   3.2   Stochastic predictive equivalence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     5

4 Partition Lattices and Quotient Types                                                              6
   4.1   Partitions as type systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    6
   4.2   Maximal collapse and useful initial quotients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       6

5 The Inner Fixed Point: Stable Quotient Refinement                                                  7
   5.1   Signature operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7

6 The Outer Fixed Point: Coarse-to-Fine Quotient Towers                                              7

7 Counterexample-Guided Refinement                                                                   8

8 Explicit Token Graphs                                                                              9

9 Interpretable State Descriptions                                                                  10

10 Dual Fixed Points: Growing Graph and Shrinking Neural Residual                                   10
   10.1 Behavior decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      10
   10.2 Certified transfer operator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   11

11 Why Literal Weight-by-Weight Draining Is Hard                                                    12

12 Information-Transport Accounting                                                                 12
   12.1 Filtration and Blackwell monotonicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       13
   12.2 Why information equality is insufficient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      13

13 Bisimulation and Simulation Certificates                                                         13

14 Approximate Quotient Towers                                                                      14

15 A Unified Certified Extraction Algorithm                                                         14
   15.1 Required invariants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15

16 Termination and Completeness                                                                     15

17 Nontermination and Irreducible Residuals                                                         16

18 Examples                                                                                         16
   18.1 Parity RNN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    16
   18.2 Bounded-context language model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        17
   18.3 Unbounded counter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     17



                                                  2
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                             Formal Framework


   18.4 Linear recurrent model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17

19 Bayesian and Probabilistic Graph Extraction                                                      17

20 Training Models for Extractability                                                               18

21 Parameter Non-identifiability                                                                    18

22 Implementation Architecture                                                                      19

23 Complexity                                                                                       19

24 Failure Modes and Required Cautions                                                              19

25 Formal Summary                                                                                   20
   25.1 Refinement tower . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    20
   25.2 Inner fixed point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
   25.3 Dual transfer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20
   25.4 Exactness certificate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   20

26 Conclusion                                                                                       20

A Notation Reference                                                                                21

B Minimal Exact Proof Obligations for One Graph Edge                                                21

C Certificate Package Schema                                                                        22




                                                  3
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                             Formal Framework


1    Problem Statement and Scope

A neural token model can often be viewed as a stateful transducer. Its hidden state may be
continuous, distributed, high-dimensional, and difficult to interpret, while its externally visible
behavior consists of token-conditioned transitions and outputs. The goal is to replace that hidden
computation, partly or completely, by an explicit graph whose nodes and edges have operational
meanings.
Three distinct goals must be separated.

 1. Behavioral extraction: preserve all externally visible outputs for all relevant token
    sequences.
 2. Reachable-state extraction: preserve enough information to distinguish all reachable
    hidden states.
 3. Parameter extraction: reconstruct the original numerical weights.

The first is generally the correct target. The second may be unnecessarily large. The third is
normally impossible from behavior alone because neural parameterizations are non-identifiable.
The framework developed here addresses deterministic and stochastic token models, including
recurrent neural networks, bounded-context transformers, quantized models, and restricted-
domain subnetworks. It does not claim that every neural network admits a small finite graph.
Rather, it specifies exactly when complete extraction exists, how partial extraction remains
sound, and how abstraction error can be made explicit.


2    Neural Token Transducers

Definition 2.1 (Deterministic neural token transducer). A deterministic neural token transducer
is a tuple
                                   N = (H, Σ, Y, F, O, h0 ),
where:

• H is the hidden-state space;
• Σ is a finite or countable token alphabet;
• Y is an output space;
• F : H × Σ → H is the transition map;
• O : H → Y is the observation or readout map;
• h0 ∈ H is the initial state.

The extended transition map is defined recursively by

                         F ∗ (h, ϵ) = h,      F ∗ (h, wa) = F (F ∗ (h, w), a).

For a prefix w ∈ Σ∗ , write

                              h(w) = F ∗ (h0 , w),       y(w) = O(h(w)).

Definition 2.2 (Reachable state space). The reachable state space is

                              HR = Reach(N ) = {F ∗ (h0 , w) : w ∈ Σ∗ }.

All exactness statements below may be restricted to HR . Unreachable hidden states need not be
represented.

                                                     4
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                                 Formal Framework


Definition 2.3 (Stochastic neural token transducer). A stochastic token transducer replaces F
and O by Markov kernels
                              KF (dh′ | h, a),   KO (dy | h).
A language model is a special case where KO is a next-token distribution.

A transformer with bounded context can be placed in this form by treating the active context or
key-value cache as the state. An unbounded-context architecture may have an infinite or growing
state object.


3     Behavioral Equivalence and Quotients

3.1   Deterministic future equivalence

Definition 3.1 (Behavioral equivalence). For h, h′ ∈ HR , define
                    h ≡B h′     ⇐⇒      ∀w ∈ Σ∗ : O(F ∗ (h, w)) = O(F ∗ (h′ , w)).

This relation identifies states that no future token sequence can distinguish. It is the neural-state
analogue of right congruence in automata theory.
Lemma 3.2 (Congruence). If h ≡B h′ , then for every token a ∈ Σ,
                                         F (h, a) ≡B F (h′ , a).

Proof. For any continuation w,
           O(F ∗ (F (h, a), w)) = O(F ∗ (h, aw)) = O(F ∗ (h′ , aw)) = O(F ∗ (F (h′ , a), w)).


Definition 3.3 (Behavioral quotient). The behavioral quotient is
                                            QB = HR /≡B .
Its transition and output maps are
                              δ([h], a) = [F (h, a)],     λ([h]) = O(h).
They are well-defined by congruence.
Theorem 3.4 (Exact finite graph criterion). A deterministic neural token transducer has an
exactly equivalent finite deterministic graph if and only if QB is finite.

Proof. If QB is finite, the quotient itself is a finite deterministic graph reproducing every output.
Conversely, any equivalent finite graph induces a finite-index equivalence relation on neural states
by equality of graph states. Behavioral equivalence is at least as coarse as this relation, so it also
has finite index.


3.2   Stochastic predictive equivalence

Definition 3.5 (Predictive equivalence). For a stochastic model, define h ≡P h′ when every
future input sequence induces the same joint distribution over future outputs:
                  ∀w ∈ Σ∗ , ∀A :     Pr(Y1:|w| ∈ A | h, w) = Pr(Y1:|w| ∈ A | h′ , w).

A finite probabilistic graph exists exactly when this equivalence has finite index and the quotient
transition probabilities are well-defined. A sufficient condition is probabilistic bisimulation or
exact lumpability.

                                                    5
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                                  Formal Framework


4     Partition Lattices and Quotient Types

4.1    Partitions as type systems

A partition
                                            P = {Ci : i ∈ I}
of HR defines an abstract type map

                              qP : HR → I,        qP (h) = i ⇐⇒ h ∈ Ci .

Each block is a behavioral type. A type may be named by an interpretable predicate, but its
validity comes from its formally specified membership and transition properties.

Definition 4.1 (Refinement order). For partitions P and P ′ , write

                                                 P ⪯ P′

when P ′ is finer: every block of P ′ is contained in a block of P.

Equivalently, if q : HR → Q and q ′ : HR → Q′ are quotient maps, q ′ is finer when there exists a
forgetful map π : Q′ → Q such that
                                          q = π ◦ q′.

Proposition 4.2 (No loss under refinement). If q = π ◦ q ′ , then every distinction observable
through q is also observable through q ′ .

Proof. If q(h) ̸= q(h′ ) but q ′ (h) = q ′ (h′ ), then applying π gives q(h) = q(h′ ), a contradiction.

Thus a refinement chain behaves like a hierarchy of refinement types:

       expects entity ⊃ expects location ⊃ expects destination after motion.

The labels are explanatory; the actual types are quotient blocks.


4.2    Maximal collapse and useful initial quotients

The indiscrete partition {HR } is the maximal collapse. It preserves no distinction. A more useful
initial quotient preserves selected coarse observables:

                                            q0 (h) = Obs0 (h),

where Obs0 may include:

• a final output category;
• a coarse next-token class;
• an entropy interval;
• a syntactic mode such as inside or outside quotation;
• a verified task-specific predicate.

The initial partition is
                                            P0 = ker(Obs0 ),
where two states share a block exactly when they have the same coarse observation.

                                                     6
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                            Formal Framework


5     The Inner Fixed Point: Stable Quotient Refinement

5.1      Signature operator

Fix a finite set A ⊆ Σ of examined tokens or token classes. Given a partition P, define
                                                                       
                             SigP (h) = Obs(h), qP (F (h, a)) a∈A .
                                                                   


Define the refinement operator
                              RA (P) = P ∧ ker(Obs) ∧            Fa−1 (P),
                                                           ^

                                                           a∈A

where Fa (h) = F (h, a) and ∧ is common refinement.
Operationally, RA splits a block whenever two states have different observations or transition to
different abstract blocks under an examined token.
Proposition 5.1 (Monotonicity). If P ⪯ P ′ , then
                                        RA (P) ⪯ RA (P ′ ).

Proof. A finer target partition can only create at least as many distinctions under each preimage
Fa−1 . Common refinement preserves this order.

Definition 5.2 (Transition-stable partition). A partition P is A-stable when
                                            RA (P) = P.
Equivalently, for each block C ∈ P and token a ∈ A, all states in C transition to one common
block, and the observation is constant on C.
Theorem 5.3 (Finite fixed-point termination). If HR is finite, the iteration
                                        P (n+1) = RA (P (n) )
started from any finite partition terminates after at most |HR | − |P (0) | proper refinement steps.

Proof. Every proper iteration increases the number of nonempty blocks by at least one. A finite
set has at most |HR | singleton blocks.

Theorem 5.4 (Coarsest stable refinement). For finite HR , the fixed point reached from P0 is
the coarsest A-stable partition refining P0 .

Proof. The operator is monotone and inflationary in the refinement order. Inductively, every
A-stable refinement of P0 refines each iterate. It therefore refines the limit. The limit is itself
stable.


6     The Outer Fixed Point: Coarse-to-Fine Quotient Towers

One fixed point gives the best quotient for a fixed observation language. Full extraction requires
the observation language itself to grow.
Let stage k specify:
                                      Ak = (Ak , Vk , Lk , εk ),
where:

                                                  7
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                                   Formal Framework


• Ak is the examined token or token-class set;
• Vk is the set of observable predicates;
• Lk is the continuation-search horizon;
• εk is an output-equivalence tolerance.

Require
                       Ak ⊆ Ak+1 ,      Vk ⊆ Vk+1 ,        Lk ≤ Lk+1 ,       εk+1 ≤ εk .

At each stage, run the inner partition refinement to a fixed point:

                                             Pk,∗ = lfp⪰Pk,0 RAk .

Initialize the next stage with
                                               Pk+1,0 = Pk,∗ .
This yields a monotone refinement tower

                                         P0,∗ ⪯ P1,∗ ⪯ P2,∗ ⪯ · · · .

Let Qk = HR /Pk,∗ . Since every stage refines the preceding one, there is a unique forgetful map

                                               πk : Qk+1 → Qk

with
                                               qk = πk ◦ qk+1 .
Hence
                                              0π    1  π
                                          Q0 ←− Q1 ←− Q2 ←
                                                         − ···
is an inverse system of explicit graphs.

                                                      q2


                                        q1


           HR              q0         Q0                           Q1                           Q2
       neural states             coarse types         π0     refined types      π1         finer graph

Figure 1: Each finer quotient contains all distinctions of the preceding quotient. Forgetful maps
recover coarser descriptions by deleting detail.



7      Counterexample-Guided Refinement

Exhaustively testing all tokens and all continuations is generally infeasible. Refinement should
be lazy and driven by witnesses.
Definition 7.1 (Distinguishing continuation). For two states h, h′ in the same current block, a
token suffix s ∈ Σ∗ is distinguishing at tolerance ε when

                                     d O(F ∗ (h, s)), O(F ∗ (h′ , s)) > ε.
                                                                     


A distinguishing suffix proves that the current quotient is too coarse. The refinement can add:

                                                      8
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                                Formal Framework


• the first token on which successors diverge;
• all intermediate prefixes along the witness suffix;
• a new output predicate explaining the divergence;
• a split of the responsible token class.

The search can use breadth-first enumeration, beam search, corpus continuations, model sampling,
adversarial token search, or formal reachability. Only a verified witness is used to split an exact
quotient.

                     Listing 1: Counterexample-guided quotient refinement
 P := initial coarse partition
 A := initial token classes
 V := initial observable predicates

 repeat:
     repeat:
         for each block C in P:
             split C by current output predicates V
             for each token class A_i in A:
                 split C if members reach different P-blocks under A_i
     until P is stable

       emit quotient graph Q(P)

       witness := find h,h’ in one block and suffix s
                  with observably different future behavior

       if no witness exists under the target contract:
           stop

       add witness tokens, predicates, and intermediate states
       refine the relevant blocks and token classes

Remark 7.2. A failed search for a counterexample is not itself a proof of equivalence unless the
search procedure is complete for the chosen state and continuation domain. Sampling creates an
empirical abstraction; formal verification creates a certified abstraction.


8      Explicit Token Graphs

A deterministic extracted graph is a tuple
                                        G = (Q, Σ, δ, λ, q0 ),
with
                                  δ : Q × Σ → Q,           λ : Q → Y.

An edge can be labelled by a token class A ⊆ Σ:
                                                A/o
                                             q −−→ q ′ .
This rule is exact on a neural block C = q −1 (q) when
                        ∀h ∈ C, ∀a ∈ A : O(h) = o,            q(F (h, a)) = q ′ .

Token classes may be local or global.

                                                  9
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                              Formal Framework


Definition 8.1 (Local token equivalence). At graph state q, define

                 a ∼q b    ⇐⇒       δ(q, a) = δ(q, b) and their output effects agree.

Definition 8.2 (Global token equivalence). Define

                             a∼b       ⇐⇒       ∀q ∈ Q : δ(q, a) = δ(q, b)

with matching output effects.

Local classes are more compact and context-sensitive. Global classes are easier to name but
usually finer.


9      Interpretable State Descriptions

Interpretability should be based on observable evidence rather than arbitrary hidden-vector
clustering. For each graph state q, maintain:

 1. shortest token prefixes reaching q;
 2. frequent corpus prefixes reaching q;
 3. current output distribution or output category;
 4. outgoing token classes and destinations;
 5. shortest suffixes distinguishing q from nearby states;
 6. verified predicates true on every neural state represented by q;
 7. uncertainty or approximation bounds.

A state label such as “expects physical destination” should be regarded as an annotation of a
formally defined block. The block itself is defined by its observation and transition signature.
A useful canonical description is relational:

                          Desc(q) = (λ(q), {Ai 7→ δ(q, Ai )}i , {D(q, r)}r ) ,

where D(q, r) stores short distinguishing suffixes between states q and r.


10      Dual Fixed Points: Growing Graph and Shrinking Neural
        Residual

10.1    Behavior decomposition

Let X denote the reachable state-token domain:

                                            X = HR × Σ.

The original one-step behavior is

                                      T (h, a) = O(h), F (h, a) .
                                                                


At extraction stage k, partition the behavioral domain into:

                                           X = XkG ⊎ XkR ,

                                                   10
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                               Formal Framework


where the graph handles XkG and the neural residual handles XkR .
The hybrid evaluator is

                                             TGk (qk (h), a),     (h, a) ∈ XkG ,
                                         (
                           Mk (h, a) =
                                             TRk (h, a),          (h, a) ∈ XkR .

Definition 10.1 (Dual extraction order). For graph-residual pairs, define

                                          (G, R) ⊑ (G ′ , R′ )

when the graph-covered domain grows and the residual domain shrinks:
                                                ′             ′
                                    XG ⊆ XG ,              X R ⊆ X R.


10.2    Certified transfer operator

Let Certk select a set of residual behaviors for which an explicit graph patch has been proposed
and formally verified. Define

                               Φ(Gk , Rk ) = (Gk ∪ Certk , Rk \ Certk ) .

The intended fixed point is
                                         (G∗ , R∗ ) = (BN , ∅).
If the graph language is insufficient, the process stops with a nonempty residual.

Definition 10.2 (Transfer certificate). A graph patch P covering domain DP ⊆ XkR has a
transfer certificate when

                              ∀(h, a) ∈ DP :        TP (q(h), a) = TRk (h, a),

and every successor routing decision preserves the same invariant recursively or is delegated to
the residual.

Theorem 10.3 (Hybrid invariance). Suppose M0 = T and every transfer step replaces residual
behavior only on a domain for which a valid transfer certificate exists. Then

                              ∀k, ∀(h, a) ∈ X :         Mk (h, a) = T (h, a).

Proof. By induction on k. The base case holds by construction. At step k + 1, points outside
the transferred domain are unchanged. On the transferred domain, equality follows from the
certificate. Therefore Mk+1 = Mk = T everywhere.

Corollary 10.4 (Safe complete zeroing). If X∗R = ∅, then the neural residual is unreachable.
All of its weights, biases, embeddings, caches, and modules may be set to zero without changing
the hybrid model’s behavior.

This is the clean formal meaning of “draining the neural network.” The behavior is removed from
the residual domain before physical parameters are zeroed.




                                                      11
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                                Formal Framework


11     Why Literal Weight-by-Weight Draining Is Hard

Let a mask mk ∈ {0, 1}p control parameters:
                                     θ k = θ ⊙ mk ,          mk+1 ≤ mk .
Literal monotone pruning would require
                        ∀x :   M (Gk+1 , θ ⊙ mk+1 , x) = M (Gk , θ ⊙ mk , x).

This condition is valid but often yields no useful early pruning because neural information is
distributed:

• one behavior may depend on many weights;
• one weight may participate in many behaviors;
• cancellation and rescaling may make individual importance nonlocal;
• redundant parameterizations hide which weight is dispensable.

A more tractable design uses structured residual modules:
                          N = Rm ◦ · · · ◦ R1         or    N = R1 + · · · + Rm ,
with gates that can disable a module after its remaining behavior has been transferred and verified.
Semantic draining is primary; parameter zeroing follows module by module or at completion.


12     Information-Transport Accounting

Information theory can measure progress, but exact semantic equivalence requires stronger
certificates.
Let S be a random reachable neural state, A a random token, and
                                        T = (O(S), q∗ (F (S, A)))
the target transition information. Let Zk be the graph-side representation and Rk the residual-side
representation.
Assume there is an exact decoder
                                            T = Dk (Zk , Rk ).
Then
                                           H(T | Zk , Rk ) = 0.
For finite or quantized variables,
                                 H(T ) = I(T ; Zk ) + I(T ; Rk | Zk ).

The terms have a natural interpretation:
                  I(T ; Zk ) = transition information represented by the graph,
        I(T ; Rk | Zk ) = transition information still uniquely required from the residual.

A desirable transfer sequence satisfies
                                         I(T ; Zk+1 ) ≥ I(T ; Zk ),
                                I(T ; Rk+1 | Zk+1 ) ≤ I(T ; Rk | Zk ).
At complete extraction,
                               H(T | Z∗ ) = 0,             I(T ; R∗ | Z∗ ) = 0.

                                                      12
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                          Formal Framework


12.1      Filtration and Blackwell monotonicity

Because Zk = πk (Zk+1 ), the generated sigma-algebras form a filtration:

                                  σ(Z0 ) ⊆ σ(Z1 ) ⊆ σ(Z2 ) ⊆ · · · .

Consequently,
                                    H(S | Zk+1 ) ≤ H(S | Zk )
when the entropies are defined.
More strongly, Zk+1 can simulate Zk by deterministic garbling through πk . Thus the finer
abstraction is at least as informative for every downstream decision problem. This is stronger
than comparing mutual information for one selected distribution.


12.2      Why information equality is insufficient

Even if
                                         I(T ; Z∗ ) = H(T )
under a distribution µ, equality may fail on a zero-probability or rare token sequence. Universal
behavioral equivalence requires

                                   ∀w ∈ Σ∗ :     yG (w) = yN (w),

or a bisimulation, simulation, or sound abstract-interpretation certificate. Information theory is
accounting; the certificate is the proof.


13     Bisimulation and Simulation Certificates

Definition 13.1 (Deterministic bisimulation relation). Let G = (Q, Σ, δ, λ) be a graph. A relation
R ⊆ HR × Q is a bisimulation when, for every (h, q) ∈ R:

                                           O(h) = λ(q),

and for all a ∈ Σ,
                                      (F (h, a), δ(q, a)) ∈ R.

Theorem 13.2 (Bisimulation implies trace equivalence). If (h0 , q0 ) ∈ R for a bisimulation R,
then
                       ∀w ∈ Σ∗ : O(F ∗ (h0 , w)) = λ(δ ∗ (q0 , w)).

Proof. Induct on |w|. The empty word follows from output agreement. For wa, apply the
induction hypothesis to reach related states, then use transition closure and output agreement.

For overapproximating safety analysis, one-way simulation may suffice. For exact replacement,
bisimulation or an equivalent functional quotient condition is preferable.
For stochastic models, replace equality by equality of output kernels and equality of transition
probability mass assigned to related equivalence classes.




                                                 13
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                                 Formal Framework


14    Approximate Quotient Towers

Many neural systems have no finite exact quotient. Define a horizon-L behavioral pseudometric:

                        dL (h, h′ ) = sup dY O(F ∗ (h, s)), O(F ∗ (h′ , s)) .
                                                                                 
                                       s∈Σ∗
                                       |s|≤L


For probabilistic outputs, a common choice is total variation distance:
                                                          1X
                           dY (p, q) = TV(p, q) =               |p(a) − q(a)|.
                                                          2 a∈Σ

Definition 14.1 ((L, ε)-equivalent block). A block C is (L, ε)-coherent when

                                          sup dL (h, h′ ) ≤ ε.
                                         h,h′ ∈C


An approximate tower may satisfy

                        L0 ≤ L1 ≤ · · · ,          ε0 ≥ ε1 ≥ · · · ,     εk → 0.

Each finite graph then comes with an explicit behavioral contract:

                         ∀|s| ≤ Lk :      dY yN (hs), yGk (qk (h), s) ≤ εk .
                                                                        


Sampling can estimate this condition but cannot prove the supremum. Certified bounds may use
abstract interpretation, interval propagation, linear programming, mixed-integer methods, SMT
solving, or exact enumeration for quantized systems.


15    A Unified Certified Extraction Algorithm

                       Listing 2: Certified coarse-to-fine dual extraction
 Input:
     neural transducer N
     initial coarse predicates V_0
     initial token classes A_0
     target exactness or schedules (L_k, epsilon_k)
     candidate generator GEN
     verifier VERIFY

 State:
     partition P := kernel(V_0)
     graph G := empty or coarse quotient graph
     residual domain U := all reachable state-token pairs
     certificate set C := empty

 for stage k = 0,1,2,...:

     # Inner fixed point: stabilize current quotient
     repeat:
         S := signatures using current outputs, predicates,
              token classes, and successor P-blocks
         P_new := split P by S
     until P_new = P


                                                     14
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                       Formal Framework



       construct quotient graph Q_k and forgetful map to Q_{k-1}

       # Transfer verified behavior to the explicit graph
       repeat:
           patch := GEN(N, P, U, Q_k)
           result := VERIFY(original hybrid,
                            hybrid with patch and reduced residual)

           if result = CERTIFIED:
               add patch to G
               remove domain(patch) from U
               store certificate
           else if result = COUNTEREXAMPLE(h, h’, suffix):
               refine P using the witness
               add relevant tokens and predicates
               return to inner fixed point
           else:
               mark patch unproved and try another candidate
       until no more patches are found at this stage

       emit Q_k, G, U, error bounds, and certificates

       if U is empty:
           set residual neural parameters to zero
           return complete graph hierarchy and proof package

       enlarge observation language:
           split token classes
           add predicates
           increase continuation depth
           decrease tolerance

       if no refinement or transfer is possible:
           return graph hierarchy plus irreducible residual



15.1     Required invariants

A correct implementation should preserve:

  Refinement:                  qk = πk ◦ qk+1 ,
  Coverage:                    X = XkG ⊎ XkR ,
  Semantic equality:           Mk = T on the certified domain,
  Monotone transfer:           XkG ⊆ Xk+1
                                      G
                                          ,
                                R
                               Xk+1 ⊆ XkR ,
  Certificate traceability:    each graph edge records its proof obligation and witness set.


16      Termination and Completeness

Assumption 16.1 (Finite representable quotient). The target behavior has a finite quotient Q∗
expressible in the selected graph language.



                                              15
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                                 Formal Framework


Assumption 16.2 (Fair candidate generation). Every required state distinction, token class,
and graph rule is eventually proposed.

Assumption 16.3 (Complete verification). Every true candidate rule in the selected logical
fragment is eventually certified, and every false rule produces a counterexample or rejection.

Theorem 16.4 (Complete extraction). Under finite representable quotient, fair candidate
generation, complete reachability coverage, and complete verification, the dual extraction process
terminates with
                                             X∗R = ∅
and a graph bisimilar to the original neural transducer on all reachable states.

Proof sketch. There are finitely many target quotient blocks and transitions. Fair refinement
eventually separates every pair belonging to different target blocks. The inner fixed point cannot
over-split in a way that prevents exact representation, though it may produce a nonminimal
refinement. Fair candidate generation eventually proposes every required transition rule. Com-
plete verification accepts each true rule. Since each accepted transfer strictly reduces the finite
set of uncovered quotient transitions, the residual becomes empty. The accumulated certificates
establish bisimulation.

Remark 16.5. For finite-precision hardware, the full machine state is finite, so exhaustive
extraction terminates in principle. The resulting graph may have up to the number of hardware
configurations and may be entirely uninterpretable. Finite existence is not the same as useful
compression.


17     Nontermination and Irreducible Residuals

A nonempty residual can arise for several distinct reasons:

 1. the behavior has infinitely many distinguishable states;
 2. the selected graph language cannot express continuous values or unbounded memory;
 3. the verifier is incomplete;
 4. reachability analysis is too weak;
 5. candidate generation fails to discover the correct predicates;
 6. the desired error tolerance is too strict for a finite quotient.

These cases should not be conflated. The output should include a residual classification:

                   R∗ = Rinexpressible ∪ Runverified ∪ Runexplored ∪ Rinfinite-state .

This makes failure informative rather than silent.


18     Examples

18.1    Parity RNN

Suppose a neural network computes parity over Σ = {0, 1}. The coarsest useful output partition
separates accepting and rejecting states. Refinement finds two stable blocks:

                             CE = even parity,          CO = odd parity.

                                                   16
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                               Formal Framework


The verifier establishes
                                          0                       1
                                    CE −
                                       → CE ,             CE −
                                                             → CO ,
                                          0                       1
                                    CO −
                                       → CO ,             CO −
                                                             → CE .
After four transition rules and two output labels are transferred, the residual domain is empty.
The neural weights can then be zeroed.


18.2    Bounded-context language model

For vocabulary size V and context length n, the exact context graph has at most

                                      1 + V + V 2 + ··· + V n

prefix states, or approximately V n full contexts. A coarse quotient can initially merge contexts
with similar next-token classes. Counterexamples split only those context classes whose future
distributions diverge. Exact completion is finite but may be exponentially large.


18.3    Unbounded counter

Let
                   ht+1 = ht + 1    on token a,            ht+1 = ht − 1 on token b,
with output testing exact zero. Different counter values can be distinguished by appropriate
suffixes. The behavioral quotient is infinite. A finite DFA extraction cannot complete. The
framework should either:

• retain an infinite symbolic counter type;
• target bounded horizons or bounded counter ranges;
• return a finite graph plus an explicit counter residual.


18.4    Linear recurrent model

For
                                   ht+1 = Aat ht ,             yt = α⊤ ht ,
a finite discrete quotient may not exist. An exact weighted automaton may nevertheless exist
with matrices Aa . The extraction language should therefore permit multiple target categories:
deterministic graphs, probabilistic graphs, weighted automata, register automata, or hybrid
graphs.


19     Bayesian and Probabilistic Graph Extraction

For a language model, let
                                               pN (a | h)
be the next-token distribution. An extracted unifilar probabilistic graph has

                                    pG (a | q),          q ′ = δ(q, a).

It generates
                                                         T
                               pG (a1 , . . . , aT ) =         pG (at | qt−1 ).
                                                         Y

                                                         t=1


                                                    17
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                                Formal Framework


A quotient block C is exactly probabilistically stable when:

                               ∀h, h′ ∈ C :    pN (· | h) = pN (· | h′ ),

and for every token a, the successor states fall in the same quotient block, or in the stochastic
case induce equal probability mass over quotient blocks.
For approximate extraction, one may require

                                 sup TV pN (· | h), pN (· | h′ ) ≤ ε.
                                                                 
                                h,h′ ∈C

The graph state can store explicit probability intervals if point probabilities cannot be certified.


20     Training Models for Extractability

The extraction problem becomes easier when the neural architecture is designed to admit a small
quotient. Possible regularizers and structural constraints include:

• vector quantization or discrete latent states;
• state clustering with transition-consistency loss;
• entropy penalties encouraging a small latent codebook;
• contractive recurrent dynamics within each intended state region;
• margins separating regions with different transition signatures;
• modular gated residual branches;
• explicit symbolic bottlenecks;
• penalties for disagreement between neural transitions and an evolving graph;
• training-time bisimulation metrics.

A joint objective can be written as

                L = Ltask + λ1 Lquant + λ2 Ltransition + λ3 Lgraph + λ4 Lresidual-size .

This changes extraction from reverse engineering into progressive compilation.


21     Parameter Non-identifiability

Even complete behavioral extraction does not identify a unique weight tensor. If a hidden layer
is permuted by an invertible permutation matrix P , then

                                 W2 σ(W1 x) = (W2 P −1 )σ(P W1 x)

for elementwise activations compatible with permutation. Similar invariances arise from positive
rescaling, redundant neurons, and inactive subspaces.
Therefore:
                            complete behavior ̸⇒ unique parameters.
The final graph should be understood as a semantic quotient of the function, not as a lossless
serialization of one arbitrary parameterization.




                                                  18
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                            Formal Framework


22     Implementation Architecture

A practical system has six components.

 1. Neural oracle: evaluates hidden states, outputs, and token transitions.
 2. Reachability engine: enumerates, samples, or soundly encloses reachable states.
 3. Quotient manager: stores partitions, signatures, and forgetful maps.
 4. Candidate generator: proposes state predicates, token classes, and graph patches.
 5. Verifier: proves transition and output obligations or returns counterexamples.
 6. Hybrid router: executes the graph on certified regions and the residual elsewhere.

Each graph edge should carry metadata:

 (source type, token predicate, destination type, output rule, certificate, coverage, error bound).

The hierarchy should support drill-down: selecting a node in Qk reveals its child nodes in Qk+1 ,
representative prefixes, distinguishing suffixes, and residual uncertainty.


23     Complexity

Let mk be the number of abstract states and rk the number of examined token classes at level k.
Once neural transitions are cached, a simple signature-refinement round costs approximately

                                             O(mk rk )

for deterministic representative transitions, or more when each block requires set-based verifica-
tion.
For a finite explicit transition system with n states and alphabet size r, classical partition
refinement can be implemented near
                                         O(rn log n)
under suitable data structures. In neural extraction, the dominant cost is usually not partition
manipulation but proving that an entire continuous block has one transition signature.
Counterexample search grows roughly as

                                              O(bL )

for branching factor b and suffix depth L without pruning. Beam search reduces empirical cost
but loses completeness.


24     Failure Modes and Required Cautions

  Failure mode                 Consequence and correction
  Hidden-vector clustering     Nearby vectors may have different future behavior. Refine
  only                         using token-conditioned successor signatures and distinguishing
                               suffixes.
  Sampling presented as        Agreement on a test corpus does not imply universal equivalence.
  proof                        Mark the graph empirical or add formal verification.

                                                19
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                              Formal Framework


  Mutual information used Information equality is distribution-dependent. Use bisimulation
  as exactness            or universal semantic obligations.
  Premature semantic la-  A cluster name may be plausible but false. Store formal predi-
  bels                    cates and evidence separately from human-readable annotations.
  Forced finite graph     Infinite counters, stacks, or real-valued registers may require
                          richer symbolic state. Return a residual or change the target
                          formalism.
  Weight norm interpreted Small or zeroed weights do not directly measure behavioral
  as information          information. Transfer behavior first, then prune under proof.
  No forgetful maps       Independently learned graphs at different resolutions may con-
                          tradict each other. Enforce qk = πk ◦ qk+1 .
  Untracked approxima- A compact graph can hide large errors. Attach horizon, metric,
  tion                    and certified error to every level.



25     Formal Summary

The full construction can be compressed into four coupled objects.


25.1    Refinement tower
                               π        π
                               0
                           Q0 ←−     1
                                 Q1 ←− Q2 ←
                                          − ··· ,            qk = πk ◦ qk+1 .


25.2    Inner fixed point

                            Pk,n+1 = RAk (Pk,n ),        Pk,∗ = RAk (Pk,∗ ).


25.3    Dual transfer

                                            BN = BGk ⊎ BRk ,
                                   BGk ⊆ BGk+1 ,        BRk+1 ⊆ BRk .


25.4    Exactness certificate

                                             O(h) = λ(q),
                                            (
                          (h, q) ∈ R =⇒
                                             (F (h, a), δ(q, a)) ∈ R    ∀a ∈ Σ.

At complete extraction:
                               BR∗ = ∅,         G∗ ≃ N ,       θR∗ = 0.


26     Conclusion

It is possible to begin with a maximally coarse high-level description of a neural token model and
incrementally expand detail until the entire observable behavior has been extracted, provided
the behavior admits a representable quotient and the refinement and verification procedures are
adequate.



                                                   20
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                           Formal Framework


The mathematically appropriate structure is not a single clustering pass. It is a hierarchy of quo-
tient types, stabilized by inner fixed-point refinement and expanded by an outer counterexample-
guided loop. Each finer graph maps onto every coarser graph through an explicit forgetful map.
In parallel, certified graph behavior grows while the neural residual shrinks. Information-theoretic
quantities quantify this transfer, but bisimulation or sound semantic verification supplies the
actual guarantee.
The approach therefore yields one of three honest outcomes:

 1. a finite exact graph and a completely drained neural residual;
 2. a convergent approximation tower with explicit error bounds;
 3. a finite interpretable graph plus a precisely delimited irreducible neural residual.

This makes the method suitable not only for interpretability, but also for model compression,
formal verification, symbolic compilation, modular replacement, and training neural systems
whose learned computation can later be converted into explicit machines.


A     Notation Reference

    HR                    Reachable neural hidden-state space.
    Σ                     Token alphabet.
    F                     Neural state-transition map.
    O                     Neural observation or readout map.
    Pk                    Partition of hidden states at abstraction level k.
    qk                    Quotient map from neural states to graph states at level k.
    Qk                    Explicit quotient graph at level k.
    πk                    Forgetful map from Qk+1 to Qk .
    RA                    Partition-refinement operator using token set or token classes A.
    Gk                    Certified graph behavior accumulated by stage k.
    Rk                    Neural behavior not yet transferred at stage k.
    εk                    Approximation tolerance at stage k.
    Lk                    Maximum verified continuation horizon at stage k.
    R                     Bisimulation relation between neural and graph states.



B     Minimal Exact Proof Obligations for One Graph Edge

For a proposed edge
                                                A/o
                                             q −−→ q ′ ,
with source concretization γ(q) ⊆ HR , prove:

 1. Source coverage:
                                              γ(q) ⊆ HR .
 2. Token predicate soundness:
                                                A ⊆ Σ.
 3. Output uniformity:
                                        ∀h ∈ γ(q) : O(h) = o.
 4. Transition closure:
                                 ∀h ∈ γ(q), ∀a ∈ A : F (h, a) ∈ γ(q ′ ).

                                                 21
Certified Neural-to-Graph Extraction                                         Formal Framework


 5. Routing exclusivity: the graph and residual domains do not overlap unless their outputs
    are proved equal.
 6. Successor coverage: every successor is either graph-covered or delegated to the residual.

These obligations are sufficient for one-step replacement. Inductive trace equivalence follows
when all reachable graph edges satisfy them and the initial states are related.


C    Certificate Package Schema

A complete extraction result should be independently auditable. Each quotient level and
transferred graph patch should therefore be emitted with a compact proof package containing:

 1. the neural model identifier, numerical precision, and execution semantics;
 2. the reachable-state contract or reachability overapproximation;
 3. the quotient predicates, token predicates, and concretization maps;
 4. the forgetful map to the preceding quotient level;
 5. edge-level proof obligations, verifier result, and counterexample history;
 6. exactness scope, approximation metric, horizon, and residual classification.

A minimal machine-readable record has the form:
 level: k
 source_type: q
 token_predicate: A
 destination_type: q_prime
 output_rule: o
 coverage: exact | overapproximate | sampled
 error_contract: {metric, epsilon, horizon}
 proof: {verifier, assumptions, certificate_hash}
 forgetful_parent: pi_k(q)
 residual_route: graph | neural | mixed

The certificate hash should identify the precise model, graph rule, assumptions, and verifier
output. This prevents a graph extracted from one checkpoint or numerical backend from being
presented as a proof for another.




                                              22
